# Tutorial 1 : Introduction to ROS2

This tutorial will guide you through key milestones to help you grasp the fundamentals about ROS2. Each milestone includes an estimated time commitment, links to the relevant documentation.

An assignment is provided at the end of the tutorial to assess and apply what you learnt during the tutorial. 

**Note**: In the links provided, you should always skip the `Prerequisites` part as it is not necessary

## 1. Get started with Concepts & CLI Tools
This first part of the tutorial will make you understand the core principles of ROS2 so that you have an overview about how everything is working altogether. You will mainly use the terminal to run commands and interact with GUI.

### Understanding the principles of ROS2 nodes
- **Time Needed:** ~10 minutes
- **Start Here:** [Understanding nodes](https://docs.ros.org/en/foxy/Tutorials/Beginner-CLI-Tools/Understanding-ROS2-Nodes/Understanding-ROS2-Nodes.html)

Nodes are the basic unit of execution in ROS. They are processes that perform computation. Nodes can communicate with each other by publishing messages to topics.

### Understanding the principles of ROS2 topics
- **Time Needed:** ~20 minutes
- **Start Here:** [Understanding topics](https://docs.ros.org/en/foxy/Tutorials/Beginner-CLI-Tools/Understanding-ROS2-Topics/Understanding-ROS2-Topics.html)

Topics are named buses over which nodes exchange messages. Topics have a type, which defines the message type that can be published on a given topic.

### Understanding the principles of ROS2 services
- **Time Needed:** ~10 minutes
- **Start Here:** [Understanding services](https://docs.ros.org/en/foxy/Tutorials/Beginner-CLI-Tools/Understanding-ROS2-Services/Understanding-ROS2-Services.html)

Services are a way for nodes to send a request and receive a response. They are defined by a pair of messages: one for the request and one for the response.

### Understanding the principles of ROS2 actions
- **Time Needed:** ~15 minutes
- **Start Here:** [Understanding actions](link_to_advanced_techniques)

Actions are similar to services, but they are used in the context of longer tasks. They are defined by a pair of messages: one for the goal and one for the result.

### Become familiar with the logging tool `rqt_console`
- **Time Needed:** ~5 minutes
- **Start Here:** [Using `rqt_console` to view logs](link_to_troubleshooting)

`rqt_console` is a tool that allows you to view the logs generated by nodes. It is useful for debugging and troubleshooting.

## 2. Time to make your own packages !
### Colcon: the tool to build you packages and workspaces
- **Time Needed:** ~20 minutes
- **Start Here:** [Using `colcon` to build packages](https://docs.ros.org/en/foxy/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Colcon-Tutorial.html)

`colcon` is a command-line tool that helps you build your ROS2 packages and workspaces. It is a replacement for the `catkin` build system used in ROS1.

### Creating your own workspace for a project
- **Time Needed:** ~20 minutes
- **Start Here:** [Creating a workspace](https://docs.ros.org/en/foxy/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Creating-A-Workspace/Creating-A-Workspace.html)

A workspace is a directory that contains your ROS2 packages. It is the top-level directory in which you will work on your project.

### Cerating your own packages inside a workspace
- **Time Needed:** ~15 minutes
- **Start Here:** [Creating a package](https://docs.ros.org/en/foxy/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Creating-Your-First-ROS2-Package.html)

A package is a directory that contains all the files needed for a specific ROS2 functionality. It is the basic unit of code reusability in ROS2.

### Writing a publisher and subscriber node in Python
- **Time Needed:** ~20 minutes
- **Start Here:** [Writing a simple publisher and subscriber (Python)](https://docs.ros.org/en/foxy/Tutorials/Beginner-Client-Libraries/Writing-A-Simple-Py-Publisher-And-Subscriber.html)

A publisher is a node that sends messages on a topic, while a subscriber is a node that receives messages on a topic. In this tutorial, you will write a simple publisher and subscriber in Python.

## 3. Homework: A Rotating Node
The goal of this homework is to apply the concepts you learned during the first tutorial. You have to create a ROS2 package that contains a node that retrieves a vector from a topic, rotates it around a given axis, and publishes the result on another topic. To do so, follow the procedure below:
  1. Create a workspace called <tt>tutorials_ws</tt>.
  2. Within this workspace, create a package called <tt>tuto_1</tt>.
  3. Create a python file <tt>rotation_node.py</tt> in the appropriate folder of your package <tt>tuto_1</tt>.
  4. Modify the files <tt>setup.py</tt> and <tt>package.xml</tt> so that the node you will write in <tt>rotation_node.py</tt> can be run with the command <tt>ros2 run tuto_1 rotation_node</tt>.
  5. Add the file <tt>vector_publisher.py</tt> available [here](./tuto_1_files/vector_publisher.py) to your package.
  6. Modify the files <tt>setup.py</tt> and <tt>package.xml</tt> so that the node written in <tt>vector_publisher.py</tt> can be run with the command <tt>ros2 run tuto_1 vector_publisher</tt>.
  7. Write the content of the file <tt>rotation_node.py</tt>. The node should perform the following tasks:
        * read the vector published as a <tt>std_msgs.msg.Float32MultiArray</tt> message every 0.5 seconds on the topic <tt>bearing_vector</tt>,
        * apply a rotation of $\pi/5$ rad around the axis $[0.707, 0.0, 0.707]$ to the retrieved vector (hint : use the scipy library),
        * publish the rotated vector as a <tt>std_msgs.msg.Float32MultiArray</tt> message on a topic called <tt>rotated_vector</tt>.
  8. Build your package with `colcon` and source the setup file.
  9. Test your code by first running the command <tt>ros2 run tuto_1 vector_publisher</tt> in a terminal, and then by running the command <tt>ros2 run tuto_1 rotation_node</tt> in another terminal.
